## BUILDING A DIGITAL CLOCK USING LPC2148 MICROCONTROLLER

# Project Description :

LPC2148 is the widely used IC from the ARM-7 family. It is a reliable option for beginners as well as high-end application developers. Real Time Clock (RTC) is used to store Time and Date in the system even when the system is not in operation. This is the system used in many devices including Laptops, Mobile phones, tablets, Digital Cameras, etc. RTC is an inbuilt part of any electronic device. DS1307 is a widely used RTC which can interface with any controller. LPC2148 controller now has an inbuilt RTC to store timing information. This is a battery backup power clock so that it tracks the time even while the computer is turned off, or in a low power state. It is an IC (not a physical clock) that is present on the motherboard and responsible for timing the functioning of the system and system clock. 

Our project’s aim is to configure this RTC and display time information onto the LCD which can be integrated into multiple devices.  Any computer device has two clocks - a hardware clock known as the Real Time Clock and the other is Software Clock. We configure it such that the lcd accepts data (from D0-D7 datapins) or commands from the KEIL program and displays the time (in terms of Seconds, Minutes, Hours) which can further be developed to use as a component responsible for interrupts, timer, task scheduling and synchronization, etc.

# Software and Hardware tools used:

KEIL MicroVision 4: This is a software development platform that can be used to create and build embedded applications such as a C/C++ compiler, macro assembler, etc. It is equipped with a device database, project manager, dialogs and even a flash programming utility. The platform offers a build mode to create applications and a debug mode for debugging the applications. With respect to this project, we have coded in KEIL’s C programming IDE using LPC2148 as our microcontroller.
Proteus Design Suite: This software is used to simulate, design and build drawing circuits. It’s primary use is for electronic circuit simulation. It is also used as the design phase of a PCB layout project. It’s a core component and is included with all product configurations. The microcontroller simulation in Proteus works by applying either a hex file or a debug file to the microcontroller part on the schematic. 

LPC2148:  One of the most widely used IC from the ARM-7 family, LPC2148 is preloaded with several inbuilt peripherals. Its RISC based approach leads to reduced costs, heat, power use along with several other advantages like portability. As mentioned earlier, it’s processor is ARM7 – TDM-S and supports instructions that are 32-bit ARM or 16-t Thumbbi. It has upto 45 GPIO pins. LPC2148 has two ports for input output operations – PORT0 and PORT1. PORT0 contains pins for individual direction and PORT1 has pins for bidirectional purpose. LPC2148RTC can be clocked by a separate 32.768 KHz oscillator or by a programmable prescale divider based on the APB clock. It maintains a calendar and clock and provides seconds, minutes, hours, month, year, day of week, day of month and day of year.It has power supply pin that can be connected to a battery or to the main 3.3V, during power down mode, it uses little power.

LM016L: This is a 16x2 LCD component used in our project. This is the most commonly used LCD based on Hitachi’s HD44780 controller.16 x 2 basically means that it can display 16 characters per line and that there are 2 lines. LM016L has 16 pins. Pin 1 is for power supply(GND) and pin 2 is for power supply(+5V). Pin 4 is the RS pin (register select) which is basically a control pin to specify if the instruction register or the data register should be connected to the data bus.  Pin 5 is 0 to indicate writing operation to the LCD Module and 1 if the LCD Module has to be read. Pin 6 denotes the enable which is used to latch information presented to its data pins. Pin 8 to pin 14 are the data bus lines.



